README.md, before:

# Homework-13-ORM-E-Commerce-WTRIII

# 13 Object-Relational Mapping (ORM): E-Commerce Back End

## Your Task

Internet retail, also known as **e-commerce**, is the largest sector of the electronics industry, generating an estimated $29 trillion in 2019. E-commerce platforms like Shopify and WooCommerce provide a suite of services to businesses of all sizes. Due to their prevalence, understanding the fundamental architecture of these platforms will benefit you as a full-stack web developer.

Your task is to build the back end for an e-commerce site by modifying starter code. You’ll configure a working Express.js API to use Sequelize to interact with a MySQL database.

Because this application won’t be deployed, you’ll also need to provide a link to a walkthrough video that demonstrates its functionality and all of the acceptance criteria being met. You’ll need to submit a link to the video and add it to the readme of your project.

## User Story

```md
AS A manager at an internet retail company
I WANT a back end for my e-commerce website that uses the latest technologies
SO THAT my company can compete with other e-commerce companies
```

## Acceptance Criteria

```md
GIVEN a functional Express.js API

WHEN I add my database name, MySQL username, and MySQL password to an environment variable file
THEN I am able to connect to a database using Sequelize
// npm i for all packages; add sequelize code to server

WHEN I enter schema and seed commands
THEN a development database is created and is seeded with test data
// create a script to run DB and seeding

WHEN I enter the command to invoke the application
THEN my server is started and the Sequelize models are synced to the MySQL database
// sequelize sync code in server.js

WHEN I open API GET routes in Insomnia Core for categories, products, or tags
THEN the data for each of these routes is displayed in a formatted JSON
// .JSON format for get routes

WHEN I test API POST, PUT, and DELETE routes in Insomnia Core
THEN I am able to successfully create, update, and delete data in my database
// create post, put, delete

// need to mess with routes, models only
```

## Mock-Up

The following animation shows the application's GET routes to return all categories, all products, and all tags being tested in Insomnia Core:

![In Insomnia Core, the user tests “GET tags,” “GET Categories,” and “GET All Products.”.](./Assets/13-orm-homework-demo-01.gif)

The following animation shows the application's GET routes to return a single category, a single product, and a single tag being tested in Insomnia Core:

![In Insomnia Core, the user tests “GET tag by id,” “GET Category by ID,” and “GET One Product.”](./Assets/13-orm-homework-demo-02.gif)

The following animation shows the application's POST, PUT, and DELETE routes for categories being tested in Insomnia Core:

![In Insomnia Core, the user tests “DELETE Category by ID,” “CREATE Category,” and “UPDATE Category.”](./Assets/13-orm-homework-demo-03.gif)

Your walkthrough video should also show the POST, PUT, and DELETE routes for products and tags being tested in Insomnia Core.

## Getting Started

You’ll need to use the [MySQL2](https://www.npmjs.com/package/mysql2) and [Sequelize](https://www.npmjs.com/package/sequelize) packages to connect your Express.js API to a MySQL database and the [dotenv](https://www.npmjs.com/package/dotenv) package to use environment variables to store sensitive data.

Use the `schema.sql` file in the `db` folder to create your database with MySQL shell commands. Use environment variables to store sensitive data like your MySQL username, password, and database name.

### Database Models

Your database should contain the following four models, including the requirements listed for each model:

* `Category`

  * `id`

    * Integer.
  
    * Doesn't allow null values.
  
    * Set as primary key.
  
    * Uses auto increment.

  * `category_name`
  
    * String.
  
    * Doesn't allow null values.

* `Product`

  * `id`
  
    * Integer.
  
    * Doesn't allow null values.
  
    * Set as primary key.
  
    * Uses auto increment.

  * `product_name`
  
    * String.
  
    * Doesn't allow null values.

  * `price`
  
    * Decimal.
  
    * Doesn't allow null values.
  
    * Validates that the value is a decimal.

  * `stock`
  
    * Integer.
  
    * Doesn't allow null values.
  
    * Set a default value of `10`.
  
    * Validates that the value is numeric.

  * `category_id`
  
    * Integer.
  
    * References the `Category` model's `id`.

* `Tag`

  * `id`
  
    * Integer.
  
    * Doesn't allow null values.
  
    * Set as primary key.
  
    * Uses auto increment.

  * `tag_name`
  
    * String.

* `ProductTag`

  * `id`

    * Integer.

    * Doesn't allow null values.

    * Set as primary key.

    * Uses auto increment.

  * `product_id`

    * Integer.

    * References the `Product` model's `id`.

  * `tag_id`

    * Integer.

    * References the `Tag` model's `id`.

### Associations

You'll need to execute association methods on your Sequelize models to create the following relationships between them:

* `Product` belongs to `Category`, and `Category` has many `Product` models, as a category can have multiple products but a product can only belong to one category.

* `Product` belongs to many `Tag` models, and `Tag` belongs to many `Product` models. Allow products to have multiple tags and tags to have many products by using the `ProductTag` through model.

> **Hint:** Make sure you set up foreign key relationships that match the column we created in the respective models.

### Fill Out the API Routes to Perform RESTful CRUD Operations

Fill out the unfinished routes in `product-routes.js`, `tag-routes.js`, and `category-routes.js` to perform create, read, update, and delete operations using your Sequelize models.

Note that the functionality for creating the many-to-many relationship for products has already been completed for you.

> **Hint**: Be sure to look at the mini-project code for syntax help and use your model's column definitions to figure out what `req.body` will be for POST and PUT routes!

### Seed the Database

After creating the models and routes, run `npm run seed` to seed data to your database so that you can test your routes.

### Sync Sequelize to the Database on Server Start

Create the code needed in `server.js` to sync the Sequelize models to the MySQL database on server start.

## Grading Requirements

This homework is graded based on the following criteria: 

### Deliverables: 10%

* The GitHub repository containing your application code.

### Walkthrough Video: 37%

* A walkthrough video that demonstrates the functionality of the e-commerce back end must be submitted, and a link to the video should be included in your readme file.

* The walkthrough video must show all of the technical acceptance criteria being met.

* The walkthrough video must demonstrate how to create the schema from the MySQL shell.

* The walkthrough video must demonstrate how to seed the database from the command line.

* The walkthrough video must demonstrate how to start the application’s server.

* The walkthrough video must demonstrate GET routes for all categories, all products, and all tags being tested in Insomnia Core.

* The walkthrough video must demonstrate GET routes for a single category, a single product, and a single tag being tested in Insomnia Core.

* The walkthrough video must demonstrate POST, PUT, and DELETE routes for categories, products, and tags being tested in Insomnia Core.

### Technical Acceptance Criteria: 40%

* Satisfies all of the preceding acceptance criteria plus the following:

  * Connects to a MySQL database using the [MySQL2](https://www.npmjs.com/package/mysql) and [Sequelize](https://www.npmjs.com/package/sequelize) packages.

  * Stores sensitive data, like a user’s MySQL username, password, and database name, using environment variables through the [dotenv](https://www.npmjs.com/package/dotenv) package.

  * Syncs Sequelize models to a MySQL database on the server start.

  * Includes column definitions for all four models outlined in the homework instructions.

  * Includes model associations outlined in the homework instructions.

### Repository Quality: 13%

* Repository has a unique name.

* Repository follows best practices for file structure and naming conventions.

* Repository follows best practices for class/id naming conventions, indentation, quality comments, etc.

* Repository contains multiple descriptive commit messages.

* Repository contains quality readme with description and a link to a walkthrough video.

## Review

You are required to submit BOTH of the following for review:

* A walkthrough video demonstrating the functionality of the application and all of the acceptance criteria being met.

* The URL of the GitHub repository. Give the repository a unique name and include a readme describing the project.

---
© 2021 Trilogy Education Services, LLC, a 2U, Inc. brand. Confidential and Proprietary. All Rights Reserved.

Commit message:

added routing. cleaned up old code in server.js. completed readme except for demo video link

README.md, after:

# Homework-13-ORM-E-Commerce-WTRIII

## Summary
Client requested assistance with implementing modern best practices for an E-Commerce site to include: use of sequelize, scripts, JSON, and API routing.

Features impletented include:
- updated models with data based on user story
- script to seed database
- use of sequelize to initiate and run server
- get, post, put, and delete routes established
- JSON formatting for all routes

## Demo Video Link:


----------------------
# Original User Story and Technical Criteria to Follow:
----------------------

# 13 Object-Relational Mapping (ORM): E-Commerce Back End

## Your Task

Internet retail, also known as **e-commerce**, is the largest sector of the electronics industry, generating an estimated $29 trillion in 2019. E-commerce platforms like Shopify and WooCommerce provide a suite of services to businesses of all sizes. Due to their prevalence, understanding the fundamental architecture of these platforms will benefit you as a full-stack web developer.

Your task is to build the back end for an e-commerce site by modifying starter code. You’ll configure a working Express.js API to use Sequelize to interact with a MySQL database.

Because this application won’t be deployed, you’ll also need to provide a link to a walkthrough video that demonstrates its functionality and all of the acceptance criteria being met. You’ll need to submit a link to the video and add it to the readme of your project.

## User Story

```md
AS A manager at an internet retail company
I WANT a back end for my e-commerce website that uses the latest technologies
SO THAT my company can compete with other e-commerce companies
```

## Acceptance Criteria

```md
GIVEN a functional Express.js API

WHEN I add my database name, MySQL username, and MySQL password to an environment variable file
THEN I am able to connect to a database using Sequelize
// npm i for all packages; add sequelize code to server

WHEN I enter schema and seed commands
THEN a development database is created and is seeded with test data
// create a script to run DB and seeding

WHEN I enter the command to invoke the application
THEN my server is started and the Sequelize models are synced to the MySQL database
// sequelize sync code in server.js

WHEN I open API GET routes in Insomnia Core for categories, products, or tags
THEN the data for each of these routes is displayed in a formatted JSON
// .JSON format for get routes

WHEN I test API POST, PUT, and DELETE routes in Insomnia Core
THEN I am able to successfully create, update, and delete data in my database
// create post, put, delete

```

## Mock-Up

The following animation shows the application's GET routes to return all categories, all products, and all tags being tested in Insomnia Core:

![In Insomnia Core, the user tests “GET tags,” “GET Categories,” and “GET All Products.”.](./Assets/13-orm-homework-demo-01.gif)

The following animation shows the application's GET routes to return a single category, a single product, and a single tag being tested in Insomnia Core:

![In Insomnia Core, the user tests “GET tag by id,” “GET Category by ID,” and “GET One Product.”](./Assets/13-orm-homework-demo-02.gif)

The following animation shows the application's POST, PUT, and DELETE routes for categories being tested in Insomnia Core:

![In Insomnia Core, the user tests “DELETE Category by ID,” “CREATE Category,” and “UPDATE Category.”](./Assets/13-orm-homework-demo-03.gif)

Your walkthrough video should also show the POST, PUT, and DELETE routes for products and tags being tested in Insomnia Core.

## Getting Started

You’ll need to use the [MySQL2](https://www.npmjs.com/package/mysql2) and [Sequelize](https://www.npmjs.com/package/sequelize) packages to connect your Express.js API to a MySQL database and the [dotenv](https://www.npmjs.com/package/dotenv) package to use environment variables to store sensitive data.

Use the `schema.sql` file in the `db` folder to create your database with MySQL shell commands. Use environment variables to store sensitive data like your MySQL username, password, and database name.

### Database Models

Your database should contain the following four models, including the requirements listed for each model:

* `Category`

  * `id`

    * Integer.
  
    * Doesn't allow null values.
  
    * Set as primary key.
  
    * Uses auto increment.

  * `category_name`
  
    * String.
  
    * Doesn't allow null values.

* `Product`

  * `id`
  
    * Integer.
  
    * Doesn't allow null values.
  
    * Set as primary key.
  
    * Uses auto increment.

  * `product_name`
  
    * String.
  
    * Doesn't allow null values.

  * `price`
  
    * Decimal.
  
    * Doesn't allow null values.
  
    * Validates that the value is a decimal.

  * `stock`
  
    * Integer.
  
    * Doesn't allow null values.
  
    * Set a default value of `10`.
  
    * Validates that the value is numeric.

  * `category_id`
  
    * Integer.
  
    * References the `Category` model's `id`.

* `Tag`

  * `id`
  
    * Integer.
  
    * Doesn't allow null values.
  
    * Set as primary key.
  
    * Uses auto increment.

  * `tag_name`
  
    * String.

* `ProductTag`

  * `id`

    * Integer.

    * Doesn't allow null values.

    * Set as primary key.

    * Uses auto increment.

  * `product_id`

    * Integer.

    * References the `Product` model's `id`.

  * `tag_id`

    * Integer.

    * References the `Tag` model's `id`.

### Associations

You'll need to execute association methods on your Sequelize models to create the following relationships between them:

* `Product` belongs to `Category`, and `Category` has many `Product` models, as a category can have multiple products but a product can only belong to one category.

* `Product` belongs to many `Tag` models, and `Tag` belongs to many `Product` models. Allow products to have multiple tags and tags to have many products by using the `ProductTag` through model.

> **Hint:** Make sure you set up foreign key relationships that match the column we created in the respective models.

### Fill Out the API Routes to Perform RESTful CRUD Operations

Fill out the unfinished routes in `product-routes.js`, `tag-routes.js`, and `category-routes.js` to perform create, read, update, and delete operations using your Sequelize models.

Note that the functionality for creating the many-to-many relationship for products has already been completed for you.

> **Hint**: Be sure to look at the mini-project code for syntax help and use your model's column definitions to figure out what `req.body` will be for POST and PUT routes!

### Seed the Database

After creating the models and routes, run `npm run seed` to seed data to your database so that you can test your routes.

### Sync Sequelize to the Database on Server Start

Create the code needed in `server.js` to sync the Sequelize models to the MySQL database on server start.

## Grading Requirements

This homework is graded based on the following criteria: 

### Deliverables: 10%

* The GitHub repository containing your application code.

### Walkthrough Video: 37%

* A walkthrough video that demonstrates the functionality of the e-commerce back end must be submitted, and a link to the video should be included in your readme file.

* The walkthrough video must show all of the technical acceptance criteria being met.

* The walkthrough video must demonstrate how to create the schema from the MySQL shell.

* The walkthrough video must demonstrate how to seed the database from the command line.

* The walkthrough video must demonstrate how to start the application’s server.

* The walkthrough video must demonstrate GET routes for all categories, all products, and all tags being tested in Insomnia Core.

* The walkthrough video must demonstrate GET routes for a single category, a single product, and a single tag being tested in Insomnia Core.

* The walkthrough video must demonstrate POST, PUT, and DELETE routes for categories, products, and tags being tested in Insomnia Core.

### Technical Acceptance Criteria: 40%

* Satisfies all of the preceding acceptance criteria plus the following:

  * Connects to a MySQL database using the [MySQL2](https://www.npmjs.com/package/mysql) and [Sequelize](https://www.npmjs.com/package/sequelize) packages.

  * Stores sensitive data, like a user’s MySQL username, password, and database name, using environment variables through the [dotenv](https://www.npmjs.com/package/dotenv) package.

  * Syncs Sequelize models to a MySQL database on the server start.

  * Includes column definitions for all four models outlined in the homework instructions.

  * Includes model associations outlined in the homework instructions.

### Repository Quality: 13%

* Repository has a unique name.

* Repository follows best practices for file structure and naming conventions.

* Repository follows best practices for class/id naming conventions, indentation, quality comments, etc.

* Repository contains multiple descriptive commit messages.

* Repository contains quality readme with description and a link to a walkthrough video.

## Review

You are required to submit BOTH of the following for review:

* A walkthrough video demonstrating the functionality of the application and all of the acceptance criteria being met.

* The URL of the GitHub repository. Give the repository a unique name and include a readme describing the project.

---
© 2021 Trilogy Education Services, LLC, a 2U, Inc. brand. Confidential and Proprietary. All Rights Reserved.
